High availability uses a mechanism called a data store heart beat as an additional way to validate if
a host is truly failed or not.
So let's take a look at our diagram here.
And again you can see we have four ESX I hosts ESX 0 1 0 2 0 3 0 4 and they're all connected to a physical
switch and they all have V.M. zero which is our management VM kernel port.
So all of the hosts can send heartbeats to each other.
And so the master is going to send solve the slaves and all of the slaves will send their heart beats
to the master.
And as long as this continues to be the case everything is fine.
Let's assume that the management connection to ESX size 0 4 is broken.
What is ESX 0 4.
Actually down at this point it's not as like 0 4 is still up and running.
There are still virtual machines that are potentially working on that host and maybe those VM even have
a network connection that's still up.
All of our traffic might not flow through that physical switch at the bottom of the diagram
when that connection is broken when that management network connection is broken a few things will happen.
The master host will try and ping ESX 0 4 and that will fail.
The master hosts will then check the data store heartbeat of ESX size zero for and what I mean by the
data store Harpy is each of these hosts has a little file called the lock file that it maintains on
shared storage.
And as long as it maintains that file and that file remains locked by the host the host must still be
up and it must still have access to storage.
So what the Master is doing is saying hey can I open the lock file for ESX 0 4 if it can't then it knows
that ESX 0 4 is still maintaining a lock on that file and therefore the host is still up.
So now the master host knows that ESX 0 4 isn't truly down.
But that it's just isolated from the management network.
So what happens in this scenario.
This is considered a host isolation.
So let's start by focusing on the master and slave hosts that a failed slave host ESX 0 4 has a broken
management network connection.
And at the moment the only thing we know for sure is that ESX I 0 4 can't connect to the management
network.
It might have other networks connected for virtual machines that are still up and running and we know
that the host can still access storage based on our data store heartbeat.
So we may not want to do anything to ESX 04 we may want to just continue to allow it to run as is the
correct host isolation response really depends on your environment.
What do you think is going on if the management network has failed.
If the management network is down are your virtual machines most likely down.
Does it run on the same network as your virtual machine traffic.
Right.
Once you answer these questions about your environment you can correctly choose the appropriate host
isolation response and you centrally have three options.
What this slave host can do is number one it can just leave the virtual machines running.
Right.
The slave host will realize that its isolated and it can either just leave those victims running as
is option to is host ESX size or four can shut down those virtual machines and theyll boot up on some
other host or the final option is to just power off the VMS without a graceful shutdown and boot them
up on other hosts and all the virtual machines files are on shared storage right.
So if those VMs get powered off or shut down another ESX host is going to be able to reach out and boot
those VAMC up.
So the correct decision to host isolation event really depends on what the architecture of your environment
looks like.